that A&M is probably going to see me a lot more than they saw you.
because they're going to have to call me out of here with feet first."
He said, what I cannot afford to give up is my laboratory.
He said, I've got 15 students that I could assign different tasks to.
I don't know which one's going to come out to what I would like to see happen or believe will happen.
Well, one out of the 15 or so, and I'm ad-libbing maybe too feely from my standpoint of what he was saying to me earlier.
I need, in a sense, that laboratory.
You don't need a laboratory.
You could take your lab in your mind and go elsewhere.
But he, and he's right.
I wish I had grad students I could give jobs to, as I did with Lynn Gillette.
Now here, Lynn, you do such and such.
Hiroshi, you work on this idea and we're going to follow that up with an article now.
It'd be wonderful.
But technically we in the, shall I say, the general area of social sciences, we're not bound to the lab as they are and therefore we are I guess more footloose and fancy free and I'm wondering if that was good too.
I sure miss A&M.
Other than the
positive support of Mr. Rutter and other administrators, the improvements in the Department of Economics, the funding that made that possible came from what other sources other than the university?
Well, we got a lot of help from Olin Foundation, National Science Foundation.
We got over a million dollars, I know, in just one fell swoop.
If, again, my memory is correct on that.
And we had several other grants, individuals, almost every one of our published parish professors were picking up grant after grant.
Department of Labor, I know, funded a couple of our studies of individual professors.
So many, many foundations, in other words, sort of the counterpart to the Welsh Foundation that's helped chemistry so much at our university.
Also then alumni put up, I had an alumni professorship for several, several years, and then George and Gladys Bell set up a chair.
And so private monies from graduates of A&M were most helpful.
Unfortunately, government monies were most important, and I say unfortunately because I've got
wish we had only private monies going all over the place than having government too prominent in our lives.
Which staff members, non-faculty, which staff members in the department during those years would you most want to thank if they could all be here today?
What would I like to do with them?
Which staff members do you remember that, with gratitude, there must have been some office people that,
You don't mean necessarily economics?
You mean just people on the campus?
No, I mean in economics, weren't there some secretaries, some staff members that were very helpful?
Almost all of them, really.
I think we had
We've got a great university that attracts pretty good people, shall I say it that way.
Tom saving kids the daylights out of me, saying that I was hell on secretaries.
And I was because I just tried to do too many things.
And he thinks I was too rough on them.
I think many of the secretaries that I had in the past would say I wasn't too bad.
I was almost sweet at times.
I think I had a wonderful crew of secretaries.
Right now I've got Murray, for example, wants to visit three of the ladies in our department, even though we've been out of here for seven years and only back typically for football games.
But there are three ladies right now in our department, plus others who I haven't had much contact with over the years, who have been great.
I can make a phone call on next Tuesday, for example, and ask for Jan, who helps me a great deal on this science and God.
Jan may not be there, so I'll ask, well, let me talk to Trish, and Trish will accommodate me if she's there.
And if not, Carolyn, Carolyn.
They're all very cooperative.
This is one thing I do want to mention.
I think our department is great.
And not necessarily great because we had an exciting, wonderful start and we did have a fantastic break.
We had a university that was breaking out of the old tradition and ready to go ahead and become a major factor in academia, internationally great.
Academically speaking, our students have always been, in my regard, top quality kids.
Not necessarily the brightest in the world, but top quality kids.
Our university through Earl Butter and that whole background era led us to the point where, in the late period of time, in the last century that's just concluded, our Department of Economics, we've had many, many excellent department heads.
Each one of them has done the job that was needed, kept people happy.
We didn't lose many.
Oh, we've had turnover, of course, anyone would.
Bob Eaklin, for example.
We deliberately lost him.
In fact I told him to go to Auburn because he didn't like mathematics.
And we were a department that was primarily mathematically oriented.
And Bob did not want to do mathematics and he felt sort of out of place.
And yet what he could do was so outstanding.
But he's again got a major position at Auburn, a tremendous chair.
I don't know his salary but his involvement.
He left here because, among other things, I know I was one to suggest, Bob, I love you.
Go to Auburn.
You'll be happier there than here because your field's a specialization.
You don't have enough comradeship here that you
personally deserve.
So anyway, we do have some sort of a cluster of academia in economics at A&M, which is a little different than completely across the board, but no university.
Chicago is much more confined, U of Chicago, no matter how great they think it is.
Harvard is also more confined from my standpoint than we are.
I think we're more across the board, but we're still essentially mathematically rooted in our economics department, probably because of Lloyd Heaton's impact.
It was a bloody necessity that we move in that direction as if we were going to develop the way I think Earl Rudder and others wanted us to.
Our supporting staff, the ladies who work here, everyone, I've never heard any problems from anyone.
The men get along real well with each other.
We're now editing a journal, Economic Inquiry, which is one of the top journals in economics throughout the world.
When did that begin here?
Oh, I wish the heck I could say it happened back in the 60s.
No way.
It happened just about four or five years ago.
And I think the fellas in that department there, they were being honored by the fact that they were able to get this journal moved.
I believe it had been housed out of UCLA, and they moved it.
And UCLA is not a bad institution.
They moved it out of there to A&M's Department of Economics.
I think it was about 1994, 1995.
And that attests to the quality of the men there now.
Unfortunately, I had retired by 92.
Maybe that gave them that extra lift, getting rid of me.
But seriously, it's a fantastic journal and it has international recognition.
And for A&M's Department of Econ to be a home base, that attests to our current department head.
Dennis Jansen, our private department head, Tim Gronberg and Tom Saving, who held that job for quite a while, and John Maloney.
We've had a great group of guys.
During the years that you, after you left the department headship and were a faculty member, what courses did you enjoy teaching most?
Spatial Microeconomics.
I don't know what we called it.
I think we did draw that title into it and I did enjoy teaching my own basic subject.
I used to love teaching macroeconomics too and I've written books you mentioned earlier on other pinnacle points.
I did write a couple of books in the field of macroeconomics which is quite distinct from Spatial Micro and that dealt with my interest in depressions.
And at that time I would say I'm a Keynesian economist, but not a classical Keynesian.
I'm a demand side Keynesian economist who's throwing in supply side economics.
Another way of putting it, people have, in my opinion, a long impression of Keynesian economics.
They think it's really big government, liberalism and so forth.
I see in it reasons for tax cutting out of Reagan and Bush and so forth, and it has supply-side phenomena on top of it, which is not classical Keynes, but to me, my variant of that subject.
So I did do work over the years in macroeconomic theory.
I enjoy teaching macroeconomics more than micro when I taught undergraduates.
And I think undergraduates can be taught macro much more readily than micro, because with macro you immediately can say such things as, do you realize we had as many unemployed in the Depression years in this country as we had in the U.S.
Army, Navy, Coast Guard, Air Force, which was, of course the Air Force was either the Army or the Navy Air Force in World War II, but we had as many unemployed as we had throughout World War II in the military?
That many people unemployed?
And so anyway, I haven't long had that concern.
And right now I'm a little concerned about the Fed.
I'm wondering what's going to happen tomorrow.
During those, well, during all your A&M years, what were your proudest moments, specific moments that you're really proud to think, to recall in your mind?
It's going to amaze you.
One of the ones that popped into my mind was when we were playing Alabama in the Cotton Bowl.
Oh gosh, that's going to trigger another one I hope, trying to remind me about my mind.
We're up at a hotel, I forget which one, up in Dallas, and we're having a big party, Earl Rudd is up on the roster.
He's talking about the game tomorrow and A&M and what we're doing at the university and how we're developing and so forth.
And if Earl were a politician I'd say it was really not a political speech.
It was just a gentle welcome and isn't it great for us all to be here and so forth.
And we had some jerks in the back of the
auditorium, whatever I should use to describe the big place that we were in, yelling, roll tide, roll.
And I mean, they were obnoxious.
They would cut in on the middle of Earl's statements.
And I kept thinking, boy, somehow he's going to really take offense and slug those fellas.
I almost fell angry as could be, and I'm sitting up there sort of in the front, and angry as could be,
What's wrong with those idiots?
Can't they understand that they wouldn't like it if they were having an old tie party and we'd come in there yelling gig'em, gig'em or something like that?
Anyway, he kept his composure.
No way did he demonstrate that that man had the fortitude to go up Pointe Hoke and look at machine guns and rifles especially, bearing down right at him and they're kicking ladders over.
What fortitude.
To me, one of my proudest moments of A&M was the fact that that man kept his composure right before the day before a football game, the evening before, and did not even say anything to those old Todd Rose
People ignored them and kept talking as if they didn't exist.
I thought A&M is pretty doggone great.
A second point, shortly before that, maybe just about a month before that, Maury and I are sitting at this football game and we had those special seats for a few years while I was active at the University as a department head and my brother's family.
And by gosh, we're playing Texas and we've got a chance to beat them.
And back in those days, as you know us better than I do, we didn't beat Texas too often.
And this fellow behind us, gee an old man, now he's my, I mean what I'm thinking of now, he was probably my current age, and I would say he was a real old guy.
And he's back of us yelling up a storm.
My gosh, he had good vocal chords.
And my wife and I are thinking, Lord, I wish he'd be quiet a little bit.
That man is going berserk.
And lo and behold, this is the year that I think the Longhorns had the Coy, one of the Coy's playing football, and Streep maybe was their quarterback.
I don't recall the exact group.
I remember more of the Aggies.
But we beat them.
And Mari and I thought, boy, this is unbelievable.
We beat the U of Texas.
And Mari turns around to look at this fellow to say, we won.
And she looks at him and I didn't bother turning around.
I'm looking at all the kids across the stands away from us and all the faculty and other older folks around near us.
I didn't turn around.
She turned around and she said, he is crying like a baby.
The guy was crying.
I turned around a few minutes later myself and I said, well, we sure did win.
He's still crying.
He was so happy that his university beat the Longhorns.
I thought, my gosh, this place is pretty fabulous.
Another football event, one of the earlier ones before that good year, I guess back in 1966 we had a really bad team.
I even went with Gene Stallings and the team to watch them play Florida State and lost in Tallahassee.
But anyway, one of the first games Murray and I watched at A&M in football, at the end of the game we lost badly and Murray and I were used to universities where you lose, you sulk and you grumble and walk out and moaning to yourself and said, my gosh, the A&M student body is cheering.
And Murray and I looked at each other, boy this is a pretty doggone good university.
They could lose badly and still be proud.
And those were frankly very, very proud moments indirectly or very unique moments in my life even though it had nothing to do with me.
What about amusing moments that you recall?
Amusing moments?
Goofy.
Did any student ever try to play a trick on you as a faculty member?
No, I guess I was not the funny type.
Well, you also weren't teaching those big introductory courses.
That's where some... Yeah, that's where you would tend to get it.
No, I can't think of it.
Where something just... It happened that it wasn't supposed to happen?
Some goof or something like that?
No, I really can't recall anything of that guy.
Then on a serious one, did anybody ever try to use any inappropriate influence on you?
Did anybody try to maneuver somebody's grade?
No, but can I tell you the truth on this one?
I didn't influence myself improperly.
I liked Gene Stallings.
I liked A&M.
I liked A&M's football.
And I recognize that these football players have a pretty tough time.
And I'm setting up a published parish department, and I'm getting young people like Phil Graham, Chuck Maurice,
Bob Eaklin, all new PhDs, suddenly replacing fellows who weren't, and they're going to go ahead because I'm trying to tell them we're going to be a top quality department.
And I figure these boys are going to be awful rough and the heck with a football player, they'll flunk the daylights out of these fellows.
I forget the man who Gene had to coordinate the academic lives of his football players.
I could roughly take a guess, but I don't even think I should.
Was it a fellow named Gibson by any chance?
But anyway, I knew the man back then who was supposed to advise his football players on their academic programs.
And I had this one fellow who stayed with us at A&M who was not on the list to be helped obtain a better job elsewhere.
whose name I can't remember again, and he did do a lot of running.
I'll sometime call you on, or when you come to Rockwell, tell you his name, especially, Murray mentioned him to me about a month ago.
Anyway, I told, in effect, Gene, if you've got any youngsters who have economics as their requirement, and if the boy is not one of the really good white kids, but just an average
type of football player in terms of scholarship.
Have him take this man's course, because this man will work harder with football players than anyone else I've got.
So from that standpoint, I cheated.
Everybody else could take the same course though.
Oh yes, yes.
But I made sure that the football players and other athletes who didn't, who were in many ways taken advantage of more so back then than now, now they're getting too many side gratuities.
But back then I did identify with those kids.
And I did tell Gene through his coordinator, this man is the only one I recommend unless your boy wants to become a professional economist or something.
But no regent tried to get somebody an assistantship or a grade?
Never had that, but I've had people ask me to help get so-and-so into the school.
I've had a bunch of people in buying a loan.
I'm sure all of us have had that, but no, I've never had any undue influence.
from any person of that kind.
Been lucky.
What do you look at the big picture?
What are Texas A&M's strengths, as far as you can tell?
Students.
Students and some of we old faculty.
What about those students?
I think they're basically clean cut kids.
I sort of like the idea that I think the university has rejected of a boy saying, what I like about A&M is that boys like girls and girls like boys.
I'm on your side on that one.
And to me, that's A&M.
And therefore I've got, frankly I've got, counting my son, we've got about eight degrees out of A&M now, and one family along the Chase family, that's my daughter Peggy's husband Ron, they've got four
You've got a fair investment.
Oh yes, yes.
So I am invested in A&M in many, many ways.
If you were now the advisor to the Texas A&M leadership, what advice would you give them?
Try to go back to what we were like more in the 70s and 80s than when we became two
And I mean too average now, not in the sense that we're not a better university today from the standpoint of academia in terms of academic excellence and potential Nobel laureates and so forth.
But I think we are too politically correct now.
We're conforming too much to some of the minority groups, and I'm not in any way trying to suggest that I'm anti this minority or that minority, quite the opposite.
I can understand and identify and sympathize with them.
But I don't have to take a course in black hair to know what a black has gone through in this country.
And I don't have to apologize for people that I've never known who centuries ago may have done some bad things.
And I'm not going to go ahead and personally accept the idea that Robert E. Lee was a horrible human being.
I have in fact, the little I know about the man's background, he was a rather decent military man.
Well, a superb husband, father, churchman.
He freed all of his own slaves.
He did what everybody should have done.
So the old A&M would eulogize exactly what you just said.
And they would say, I wish I were like him.
Let's see, I skipped over, and I'm looking back at when I skipped over.
When Mr. Rudder died, he's replaced by Jack Williams and John Calhoun.
How did you see them and their leadership?
I thought they did great.
They really did.
Just like I would say I did a fantastic job in economics.
I had fantastic backing, as I've indicated, including bankers who I never even knew until after I got here.
So someone greased a lot of the tracks.
But after me, we had a series of guys who kept doing it.
They were all in the same ballpark, all in the same spirit.
I think the same thing was true.
I'm not saying that Jack Williams was, no one could be, in my regard, another Earl Rudder.
Frankly, Earl Rudder would be the most amazing university president, especially today.
No one would think he would be
He was not an academician as such.
He was a soldier, and thank heaven Eisenhower indicated that great soldiers are not necessarily great university presidents, as much as I did admire Eisenhower.
What he did at Columbia was not phenomenal.
But those who followed Earl Butter, just like those who followed in economics, I think have all done the job.
We've also had some rather good deans, too, that I know of, and the dean of faculty.
Everything went smoothly, as far as I can tell, after Wayne.
Wayne Hall and Mac Prescott was, all of you guys frankly.
I think everyone here who's still, anyway, everyone in the 70s and 80s did beautiful jobs in the 90s and now I'm getting a little concerned.
I'm afraid we're being pressurized too much to mimic Stanford, Berkeley, Yale,
And I'm getting a little upset over that.
I don't like what our current dean and our college, frankly, your college, mine, or olden days, have been doing with multicultural diversity requirements.
To me, I don't buy it.
I'm still back in Plato, Aristotle, and I think of the greatness of our scholars who have been learned in those areas and what they've been able to create over the centuries.
Don't take race out of the course and make it a separate.
Put it into the course.
Yes.
I kid around with Dennis Jansen.
Have you met Dennis?
No.
You've got to.
And in fact, sometimes, you know, Dennis knows I'm here visiting with you.
And I told Dennis, I asked Dennis if he would ever be receptive, if you would like to meet with he and a handful of those who he thinks have been most part
the biggest part of our Department of Economics over the years.
Oh, I'd be honored.
Oh, I think it'd be wonderful.
Yes, yes.
Anyway, with Dennis on this subject, Dennis, bless him, has a flock of Bach here.
It's beautiful.
I've been so envious of him, and now I'm talking about ten years ago when he was in our department and I wasn't quite as bald as I am.
I would look at Dennis and I'd say, you know something, I'm going to teach a course here on baldness because you have no idea what it's like and you could not figure it out.
He said, well Mel, I'll teach a course in black hair and you wouldn't understand it because you don't have any.
Isn't that amazing we have to have courses like that?
Like I don't want a course in women's history any more than there'll be a course in men's history.
Yes, I agree.
It's a course in American history.
Yes, oh gosh, it's pathetic.
Let's see, getting close to finished, did we finish with advice to A&M?
What advice would you give
A&M's leadership.
Go back to how we would have answered the problems that are current today.
How would they have answered it back in 1975, 1985, even 1990?
Let us not necessarily mimic what the press wants us to be saying.
Let's be A&M.
All right.
What advice would you have to the economics program today?
They call you as a consultant.
Forget Hollywood.
Forget the language that you're picking up out of Hollywood.
Treat your students as if they were your parents, but make them learn and be proud of your teaching besides your research.
And by gosh, it's kind of tough to say teaching because we know the unfortunate part of the game is research.
And in fact here, what should A&M do about it?
I think A&M should start, and I do want to mention Al Chalk in this connection.
A&M should start honoring the guys who really can teach, and they should learn how to identify not by student questionnaires, but you can identify by the fellows who have graduated, try to learn from the graduates who they really thought were great as professors.
These questionnaires I don't think will do the job, but Al Chalk,
were so, in effect, maligned, both by way of his paycheck and his job, because Earl had the idea, or anyone who likes Willie Nelson and brings a Willie Nelson to our campus cannot be my type of man.
Earl, in fact, he misjudged him.
It took me about two and a half years to convince Earl Rudder that Al Chalk is much more your type of man than you've ever imagined, maybe more so your type than I am, and Al deserves a teaching award.
And Earl, I guess told Andy Suttle or whoever was the one in charge of that end of it, okay, let's give Al Chalk a teaching award.
Al Chalk was a phenomenal teacher.
Oh yes, yes.
But he never was paid for it.
He never was recognized for it.
And that I think is a glaring error that we've got.
Maybe we want to encourage, in spite of the fact that we've got to keep going on the research level, but maybe we want to figure out some way to really encourage young people
to keep their heart in the classroom, do the job right, and that they will at worst be taken care of pretty well, even if other universities are not bidding for their services.
All right, two more questions.
Let's make believe that someone walks up to you and hands you a check for a million dollars with one requirement.
You must pass it on to Texas A&M, but you get to decide what use will be made of it.
What would you have A&M do if you were to give them a large gift?
What would be your favorite A&M recipient?
Gosh, you got me stumped.
I probably immediately called you and a few other friends and asked for advice.
really, and I would do that.
I would ask Al Cotton what's wrong in chemistry that could be rectified.
I'd call Tim Hall what's wrong in biology that could be rectified.
I don't know the current mathematicians as I did years ago.
I would call them.
I would call the areas that I think I have some rapport with.
I would call the people in political science, sociology, and history, and English.
Find out from each one.
what they think is their glaring need, and how could they improve it if they have money.
And then I'd probably take that million and try to apportion it some way to the two or three areas I would play under.